file: INSTALL			G. Moody	30 January 2000

WFDB Software Package installation notes
_______________________________________________________________________________

Under UNIX or Linux:

1. Install the World Wide Web Consortium's libwww library (you will need both
   the library itself and the developer's package;  download them from
   http://www.physionet.org/physiotools/libwww/, or from the W3C's web site
   at http://www.w3.org/Library).  You may skip this step if you don't want
   support for reading input files from remote web and FTP servers.  See
   README.NETFILES for further information about this option.

2. Install the XView library (see http://www.physionet.org/physiotools/xview/)
   if you want to use WAVE, and be sure that the directory that contains the
   XView application 'textedit' (usually /usr/openwin/bin) is in your PATH.
   For information about WAVE, see the WAVE User's Guide,
   http://www.physionet.org/physiotools/wug/.

   WAVE uses Netscape (or another web browser, if you've made the appropriate
   changes in waverc/Makefile) for some of its on-line help.  Copy the
   contents of http://www.physionet.org/physiotools/wug/ into
   /usr/local/help/html/wug if you wish to read the help from local files;
   otherwise, edit wave/wave.info and change all occurrences of
   '/usr/local/help/html/' into 'http://www.physionet.org/physiotools/wug/'.
   (The utility 'wget' -- which you can find with a web search -- can be
   helpful if you wish to copy an entire directory of a web site, as suggested
   here.)

3. In this directory, type:
	./configure
	make install
   You will need root permissions to run 'make install', unless you change
   WFDBROOT in 'Makefile' so that the files are installed in a directory
   that you own.

_______________________________________________________________________________

Under MS-DOS or MS-Windows:

If possible, use djgpp (DJ Delorie's MS-DOS port of gcc, free from
http://www.delorie.com/djgpp/) or cygwin (Cygnus Software's MS-Windows port of
gcc, free from http://sourceware.cygnus.com/cygwin/).  Both of these include
many of the GNU utilities, including GNU make.  In this directory, type:
	make -f Makefile-dos-gcc

If you are using an older version of MS-DOS that cannot handle long filenames,
you will need to rename the 'Makefile-dos-gcc' files here and in each of the
subdirectories, and then you will need to edit the one in this directory to
change each reference to 'Makefile-dos-gcc' appropriately.

If you use cygwin, please try to download and install the libwww package, from
http://www.physionet.org/physiotools/libwww/, or from the W3C's web site at
http://www.w3.org/Library), and modify lib/Makefile-dos-gcc so that libwww will
be linked together with the WFDB library.  Instructions for compiling libwww
with cygwin are provided in the sources and at http://www.w3.org/INSTALL.html.
This should work but has not yet been tested; please let me know what changes
are needed.  (Details will be posted on PhysioNet once they are available.)

The 'Makefile.dos' files in each of the subdirectories of this one (except for
wave, wave-doc, and waverc, which are for UNIX only) can be used with the
'make' utilities provided with most commercial C compilers, although you may
need to customize them for your compiler; your feedback is appreciated.  A
version of libwww for MSVC++ 5.0 is available from PhysioNet and from the W3C
web site.  If you don't have a 'make' utility, try djgpp or cygwin.

_______________________________________________________________________________

Under MacOS or other operating systems

Sorry, but you are on your own here.  Previous versions of the WFDB library
and some of the applications have been compiled successfully by Macintosh
users (and on VMS, among other environments).  The sources are written in
highly portable C and should not be difficult to port to any environment where
an ANSI/ISO or K&R C compiler and the standard C library are available.

If you find that changes are necessary in order to compile this software
successfully, please send details to the author (george@mit.edu) so that
others can benefit from your experience.  Contributions of working binaries
are welcome, but please write first before sending them to me. Thanks!

_______________________________________________________________________________

Once you have successfully compiled and installed the WFDB Software Package,
you will find a great deal of information about using it on PhysioNet;  begin
looking in http://www.physionet.org/physiotools/wfdb-books.shtml.
