file: README		G. Moody	 28 July 1989
			Last revised:	  7 May 1999

This directory contains sources for the example programs in the WFDB
Programmer's Guide.  See the Guide for details on the programs.

If you have not previously tried to use WFDB applications, you may not have
set the database path (the environment variable WFDB).  Read the comments on
this subject in the Guide before trying to use these programs.  The templates
in the `app' directory at the same level as this one may be helpful.

A note about `refhr.c'
----------------------

The file `refhr.c' is a sample implementation of a program for obtaining
reference heart rate data, as described in `Evaluating ECG Analyzers', an
appendix to the WFDB Applications Guide.  (The source for this appendix
is `eval.tex' in the `doc' directory at the same level as this one.)  If you
need to evaluate the accuracy of heart rate measurements made by an ECG
analyzer, modify `refhr.c' so that it uses the measurement algorithms made by
the analyzer rather than the sample algorithms provided.  (You may wish to
compile and run the version of `refhr' provided here first, in order to see
how it works, but this will not be useful for testing your analyzer's heart
rate measurements unless your analyzer happens to use one of the algorithms
provided in the sample implementation of `refhr'.)

Compile and run your modified version of `refhr', providing it with the
reference (`atr') annotation files for your test database as input.  Collect
the output annotation files produced by `refhr'.  Modify your analyzer so that
it records its heart rate measurements in output annotation files, in the same
format as those produced by `refhr', and run your analyzer, providing it with
the signals from your test database as input.  Finally, use `mxm' and
`sumstats' (in the `app' directory at the same level as this one) to compare
the annotation files generated by your analyzer and by your modified version of
`refhr'.
